restindex
/restindex

The changing climate
====================

.. epigraph::

   *"[A] considerable change of climate, inexplicable at present to
   us, must have taken place in the Circumpolar Regions, by which the
   severity of the cold that has for centuries past enclosed the seas
   in the high northern latitudes in an impenetrable barrier of ice
   has been during the last two years, greatly abated."*

   ―President of the Royal Society, to the Admiralty, 20 November
   1817 [#royal-society]_

.. epigraph::

   *"Ragavis [1809–1892] accusses Strabo [c. 63 BC – c. 24 AD] of
   inaccuracy, because the latter said that the river [Kephisos of
   Attica] is dry during summer, when in fact its flow is perrenial.
   When I came to Greece, just before the regime change-over [probably
   1877], I found that Ragavis was right and Strabo was wrong, for
   there was no time of the year when Kephisos was without water.
   While I did not make measurements of its depth, I perfectly
   remember that, when at its lowest, the water would cover a quarter
   of my horse's legs, and when higher it would reach mine; and many
   times, while passing through Sepolia, I happened to be caught in a
   blocking maze of intertwined streams. These days of old glory are
   now forgotten and today the river is almost always dry."*

   ―Emmanouel Roides, *The countryside of Athens*, 1897

.. epigraph::

   *"There are ominous signs that the earth's weather patterns have
   begun to change dramatically... A survey completed last year by Dr.
   Murray Mitchell of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
   Administration reveals a drop of half a degree in average ground
   temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere between 1945 and 1968."*

   ―Peter Gwynne, *The cooling world*, Newsweek, 28 April 1975
   [#newsweek]_

The average temperature of the Earth, it is claimed, has increased by
0.7°C during the last 100 years, and this, it is also claimed, is the
result of man-made global warming.

It is important to understand that the Earth has no such hole in which
you can stick a thermometer and take a reading.  Determining the
so-called average temperature of the Earth is a very complicated
business. You need to use measurements of temperatures wherever those
exist, and make assumptions about how to average them over areas. In
addition, 0.7°C is a very low variation, barely over the accuracy
range of conventional thermometers. If you have measurements from 1850 to 1950
in a location, it is not the same thermometer that was used throughout
that period; and even the same thermometer might produce slightly
different measurements during its life; and differences in the weather
station installation, such as painting its enclosing box or the
changing vegetation, also have an effect.  This means that you have to
go into very complex studies, comparing measurements with those in
nearby locations (which also, of course, suffer from the same
problems), and doing appropriate calibrations. It can be difficult to
reach an accuracy of 0.7°C.

Even if you solve these problems, and you can safely arrive at the
conclusion that your measurements do indicate a temperature increase,
it is by no means easy to generalize to the Earth average. Maybe the
earth has heated up and the sea has cooled down; maybe Europe and
North America (where there are many measuring stations) have heated up
and Africa has cooled down. Maybe the Northern Hemisphere has heated
up and the Southern has cooled down. In addition, thermometers are
usually located near urban areas, and urbanisation does cause a local
temperature increase, which, however, is not necessarily an indication
of a global temperature increase. Since 1978, another means of
measuring global temperature is with satellites, but this is also
indirect and involves assumptions and calculations. Therefore, the
alleged average global temperature increase, rather than fact, is
an estimation.

We cannot tell you whether the estimation is good or bad, because we
have not examined it; but in any case, 0.7°C in 100 years is a quite
reasonable change, not especially worthy of much notice. The Earth's
temperature has never stayed the same.  A change of 0.7°C in a century
is not unusual and it does not indicate a permanent trend any more
than does a difference in temperature between yesterday and today.

Imagine that you are a housefly born in Athens, Greece, in 15 July.
Houseflies normally live up to 25 days, but you have an exceptionally
long life and you die in 15 August.  We select 15 July to 15 August
for our example because any temperature variations in this period are
random in Greece (in contrast to, for example, April, where 1 April
is, on the average, cooler than 30 April).

During your life, some days are hot, about 35―36°C, some are cool,
about 29―30°C, and so you experience a large and interesting range of
temperatures. It is 11 August, and you even remember an event that
happened in your early days, in 17 July, of water falling from the
sky, which had forced you to stay hidden. You are the oldest housefly
around and you tell stories about that to the younger ones.

Then, on 12 August, a heat wave strikes Athens, raising the
temperature to 39°C. On 13 August it is 41°C, and on the 14th it has
reached 42°C. By human standards, this is quite usual; such a heat
wave happens in Athens almost every year. But you are a housefly, and
you have never seen anything like that.  "Never in my life have I seen
such heat!", you exclaim; and you are tempted to think that the
climate is changing in an unusual manner, and that the world is coming
to an end.

Now imagine that you are a being as old as humanity itself. Humans are
thought to inhabit this planet something like 100 thousand years.
Figure 1 shows how the temperature has changed during these 100
thousand years.

.. figure:: images/temperature-during-humanity.png

   Figure 1: Approximate average Earth temperature in the last 100 thousand
   years (difference from today in °C)

.. admonition:: How do we know?

   How do we know that humanity is 100 thousand years old? There are
   several techniques that can be used to estimate the age of an old item
   such as a fossil or an artifact; such techniques are dendrochronology,
   radiocarbon dating, and pottasium-argon dating. For the sake of brevity
   we won't go into detail; you can find information about them in books
   [#archaeology]_ or by searching the web. Archaelogists and
   palaeontologists use such techniques to collect evidence and make rough
   estimations. The exact date of the appearance of Homo Sapiens is
   unknown, but it is thought to be some time between 500 thousand and 75
   thousand years ago [#archaeology]_.

   How do we know the evolution of earth temperature during the last
   hundred thousand years? In Antarctica and Greenland a new layer of ice
   is added each year, covering the ice of the previous year.  These
   places have one long night and one long day each year, and the night
   ice is slightly different than the day ice, resulting in slightly
   different colours. Like tree rings, we can see horizontal stripes in
   ice columns extracted by drilling, and each stripe is one year. There
   are two complementary ways to determine the temperature of each year.
   First, as when you put frozen food in the oven, it warms outside but
   is still cold inside, the Antarctic ice retains its internal
   temperature as it was thousands of years ago.  Second, most oxygen is
   oxygen-16, but there is also an isotope oxygen-18, and the content of
   oxygen-18 in snow depends on the temperature during the snowfall. By
   determining the content of oxygen-18 in ice we can estimate the
   temperature during snowfall.  These two techniques are used together,
   for verification and calibration of one another [#paleoclimatology]_.
   Results are good, but they also depend on the unproven assumption that
   the average temperature of the Earth moves together with the average
   temperature of the poles.

So, yes, the climate is changing. It is changing all the time. It is
changing from minute to minute (although in this case we call it
"weather"), from year to year, from century to century, and from
millenium to millenium. If your 100-year-old great grandfather tells
you that the climate is different now than it was in his early days,
this is no suprise. The climate is probably not as different as he
thinks, because human memory is very selective and far from objective,
but at the same time it is an undeniable truth that climate has always
been changing, in all time scales.


Next: `The climate models`_

.. _the climate models: models.html

References
----------

.. [#royal-society] *Minutes of Council,* Volume 8. pp.149-153, Royal
   Society, London, 1817; http://www.john-daly.com/polar/arctic.htm,
   accessed on 2009-04-06.

.. [#newsweek] http://www.denisdutton.com/cooling_world.htm, accessed
   on 2009-04-21.

.. [#archaeology] Brian M. Fagan, "Time", in *Archaeology: A Brief
   Introduction,* Fourth Edition, HarperCollins, 1991, pp. 51–72.

.. [#paleoclimatology] Holli Riebeek, "Paleoclimatology: The Ice Core
   Record", 2005;
   http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/Paleoclimatology_IceCores/,
   accessed on 2009-04-21.
