restindex
    page-title: The scientific consensus
/restindex

The scientific consensus
========================

**[Ready for internal review.]**

.. epigraph::

   *"[The] planet from which the little prince came is the asteroid
   known as B-612. This asteroid has only once been seen through the
   telescope. That was by a Turkish astronomer, in 1909.  On making
   his discovery, the astronomer had presented it to the International
   Astronomical Congress, in a great demonstration. But he was in
   Turkish costume, and so nobody would believe what he said....
   Fortunately, however, for the reputation of Asteroid B-612, a
   Turkish dictator made a law that his subjects, under pain of death,
   should change to European costume. So in 1920 the astronomer gave
   his demonstration all over again, dressed with impressive style and
   elegance. And this time everybody accepted his report."*

   ―Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, "The Little Prince" [#prince]_

.. epigraph::

   *"If 75 doctors are telling you that you have cancer and the other two
   say it is a conspiracy, who do you believe?"*

   ―Franny Armstrong, film director [#armstrong]_

Franny Armstrong's quote might not be very worthy of attention if it
were not representative of a widespread argument that there is alleged
agreement among scientists that anthropogenic (man-made) global
warming (AGW) is happening. There are many errors in the quote, not
the least of which is that we never claimed that it is a conspiracy.
Certainly there are some skeptics who think it is a conspiracy, some
skeptics who think it is stupidity, some who think both, some who
think that human society is chaotic and therefore you can't find exact
reasons for everything, and so on. Dividing scentists into global
warming alarmists and conspiracy theorists means that you cannot
distinguish shades of grey.

There are several problems with the consensus argument. The first one
is that it is difficult to define what consensus means and to verify
whether such consensus exists. The media often claim about alleged
consensus, but if you look carefully, they don't explain why they
think that there is consensus. If someone claims that there is
consensus about something, this does not mean that there is consensus;
only that someone claims it.

If by "consensus" we mean that almost all organisations who have
stated an opinion agree that AGW is happening, then, yes, there may be
consensus. This, however, is not the right way to define consensus.
We'd need to examine a good number of these organisations, and check
who are their members and what is the process by which the decision
for the stating of the opinion was reached. Did the members vote?  How
were they invited to vote and how many responded?  Was the decision
made with a 90% majority? Or maybe only 51%?  Or was it maybe an
elected board who decided? Organisations are often driven more by
politics than by science, and when we say that a specific organisation
has a specific opinion, it is quite difficult to know what this means.

Therefore, rather than looking at organisations, we'd better look at
individuals. Again, there are problems. There is a list of 700
scientists who are dissenting that AGW is happening [#skeptics-list]_,
but there also appears to be controversy about the accuracy of that
list [#skeptics-list-controversy]_. There are studies that claim the
consensus is real, but the accuracy of these studies is also debated.
A recent study by Doran and Zimmerman [#doran]_ found that there is
consensus, and if you go and read it you'll see for yourself the
problems of determining whether there is consensus. Doran and
Zimmerman seem to have done careful work and have presented it nicely,
but still we can find several problems. For example, the most
important question of their questionnaire is "Do you think human
activity is a significant contributing factor in changing mean global
temperatures?" Despite a number of controversial assumptions that this
question contains ("significant contributing factor" is quite vague,
and "changing mean global temperatures" reveals a certain way of
thinking that is not necessarily correct; we explain both those in the
epilogue), we could probably reply "yes" (with a sidenote that this is
not our scientific response, but the closest of the three choices the
questionnaire gives us). Still, this does not prove anything. One
could think that human activity is a "significant contributing factor"
in the alteration of the landscape; this does not necessarily mean
that he'd think that the landscape is being destroyed. This question
is only one of the problems in the study; we can see many more.

The difficulty in defining and measuring consensus, and the heated
discussions about whether consensus exist, tempt us to make this
provoking question: Is there scientific consensus that there is
scientific consensus? You may think that this is a silly question, and
we agree. But if you think that you are unqualified to judge AGW by
yourself and therefore you can only count scientists as if they were
casting votes, then you have a problem: counting them is quite
difficult, and, similarly, you are probably unqualified to judge the
counting, and you will be trapped in our silly question.

The second problem with the consensus argument stems from the first.
Since consensus is difficult to define and estimate, if you use it as
an argument then everyone believes in something simply because
everyone else believes so. This is a well-known marketing trick:
advertisements often try to convince you that everyone else is doing
something, so you also have to do it. By creating the impression that
everyone is doing something, everyone actually starts doing it.
Sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't, but it can, unfortunately,
also work with scientists, and in the case of AGW there is an effort
to do it.  Margaret Beckett, former UK Secretary of State for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, said that climate change skeptics
should be denied media air time [#deny-airtime]_, and Franny Armstrong
has suggested the same [#armstrong]_. If you deny media air time to
the skeptics, you can certainly create any consensus impression you
want. What is even sadder is that this is not anything new; the way
they put it makes it show as if all these years there has been
sufficient debate, and that now the science is allegedly settled; but
not only is science not settled, not only denying air time to the
skeptics would be wrong even if the science had been settled, but such
statements about stifling skepticism have been made since 1989, if not
earlier [#lindzen]_.

The third problem with the consensus argument is that science is not
democratic.  If one hundred thousand scientists believe something and
one scientist demonstrates that the something is wrong, then the
something is wrong. In the previous chapters we've explained that AGW
is unfounded, and even if all other scientists in the world disagreed,
we'd still hold to it. Luckily we are not alone.

But unfortunately, in practice science is strongly affected by
politics. The quote from the Little Prince conveys this sad reality in
a wonderful way, and people besides Antoine de Saint-Exupéry have
explained the problems in more detail. Donald Miller [#miller]_ is
good reading, explaining how the research funding system works, and
the devastating way in which it pushes scientists from skepticism,
which is the essential quality of a good scientist, to conformance.
More than 25 years ago, J. Scott Armstrong [#authors-formula]_
explained that, in order to be successful in publishing papers,
scientists should not pick important problems, not challenge existing
beliefs, not obtain surprising results, not use simple methods, not
fully disclose how they reached their results, and not write clearly.
[I want to add a story about the Science magazine rejecting dissenting
opinions, citation needed]. To top it all, the number of scientific
fraud incidents that go unpunished, or even encouraged, is increasing.
An investigation is ongoing about serious allegations of data
fabrication by a well-known climate scientist, and serious allegations
of cover-up by his university [#keenen]_. [Second incident needed.]
These are not isolated events; they are representative of the dominant
science culture today: push for publications, push for image, do
favours to colleagues and expect favours from them, and neglect
science ethics.

In conclusion, rather than arguing about whether there is consensus
(or consensus of consensus), we'd spend our time much better if we
carefully looked into these problems, and tried to create and
implement the groundbreaking policies needed to reverse the sad fact
that science, to a large extent, has been reduced to business and
politics.

Next: `The pre-emptive action`_

.. _the pre-emptive action: preemptive.html

References
----------

.. [#prince] Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, "The Little Prince", translated
   by Katherine Woods, Gallimard, 1943.

.. [#armstrong] Sammy Wilson, "Condemnation over climate change
   'doubt'"; available at
   http://www.newsletter.co.uk/news/Condemnation-over-climate-change-doubt.5105071.jp,
   accessed on 2009-04-06.

.. [#doran] Peter T. Doran and Maggie Kendall Zimmerman, "Examining
   the Scientific Consensus on Climate Change", Eos, Transactions,
   American Geophysical Union, 90(3), January 2009; available at
   http://tigger.uic.edu/~pdoran/012009_Doran_final.pdf, accessed on
   2009-04-21.

.. [#skeptics-list] U.S. Senate Minority Report: More Than 700
   International Scientists Dissent Over Man-Made Global Warming
   Claims, available at
   http://epw.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Minority.Blogs&ContentRecord_id=2674E64F-802A-23AD-490B-BD9FAF4DCDB7,
   accessed on 2009-04-20.

.. [#skeptics-list-controversy] "650 ‘prominent scientists’ dispute
   climate change?";
   http://feeds.ofdan.ca/~r/scruffydan/blog/~3/508490731/, accessed on
   2009-04-14.

.. [#deny-airtime] Brendan O'Neill, "A climate of censorship", The
   Guardian, November 2006;
   http://commentisfree.guardian.co.uk/brendan_oneill/2006/11/a_climate_of_censorship.html

.. [#lindzen] Richard S. Lindzen, “Some coolness concerning global
   warming”, Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 71(3),
   pp. 288-299, 1990; available at
   http://web.mit.edu/cegeon/Public/research/global_warming/lindzen_some_coolness.pdf,
   accessed on 2009-04-07.

.. [#miller] Donald W. Miller, Jr., "The government grant system:
   inhibitor of truth and innovation?", Journal of information ethics,
   16(1), Spring 2007; available at http://www.donaldmiller.com/,
   accessed on 2009-04-20.

.. [#authors-formula] J. Scott Armstrong, "Barriers to Scientific
   Contributions: The Author's Formula", Behavioral and Brain Sciences 5,
   pp. 197-199, June 1982; available at
   http://ideas.repec.org/p/wpa/wuwpgt/0502057.html, accessed on

.. [#keenen] Douglas Keenen, "Remarks on the fraud allegation against
   some climatic research of Wei-Chyung Wang"; available at:
   http://www.informath.org/apprise/a5620.htm, accessed on 2009-04-21.
