restindex
    page-title: Epilogue
/restindex

Epilogue: Chaos, Hurst-Kolmogorov pragmaticity, and uncertainty
===============================================================

**[Needs expansion.]**

Have you ever wondered how weather predictions are made? If you think
that it's meteorologists looking at satellite pictures or weather maps
and determining how current weather will move, you got it wrong.
Weather predictions are made with weather models. Let's see how it
works.

Every 12 hours, meteorological centres around the world send
meteorological balloons up. These are little balloons with several
meteorological sensors attached, such as a thermometer and a pressure
sensor, and a trasmitter that transmits the measurements to a ground
station. As the balloon goes up in the atmosphere, the measurements
are transmitted to the ground, and so the meteorological variables at
many altitudes are recorded. These measurements from around the world
are collected, together with measurements from ships and aeroplanes,
and they tell us how the weather was at the time the measurements were
made. In order to make the calculations needed for the prediction, the
atmosphere is divided into little pieces in such a way that the
temperature, pressure, etc., in each little piece is known by the
measurements.  Because we know the natural laws that describe how
conditions in each piece are affected by its neighbouring pieces, we
can calculate how each piece will evolve in time, and hence we have a
prediction of the weather.  The number of calculations required is
huge and can only be performed by a computer. In other words, a
computer simulates the atmosphere. The system of simulation (which is
effectively a set of equations) is called a weather model. The input
to the weather model (i.e. the measurements of the current weather) is
called the initial conditions.

This way of weather forecasting was first used in the 1960s.  Edward
Lorenz, one of the first scientists to experiment with a weather
model, tried to make a forecast for two months ahead, and for some
reason he performed the calculation twice.  Although in both
calculations he used the same weather model and the same initial
conditions, the results were completely different. At first he thought
he had made an error, and after trying to locate the error, he found
out that he had made no error; but one of the times he had run the
simulation, he had rounded the initial conditions to the third decimal
digit; the other time he had rounded to the sixth decimal digit
[#cooper]_.  This means that even if you could accurately determine the
initial conditions in every place of the earth (and the atmosphere),
you'd still be unable to predict the weather in two months: because an
input temperature of 31.23856 and an input temperature of 31.23857
would give completely different results. The mathematical term for this
is **chaos**; we say that a function is chaotic if infinitesimal
differences in the input cause huge differences in the output. The
reason weather models have such unstable behaviour when you try to
forecast the weather two months ahead is that the weather is chaotic.

Another way to explain this is the well-known example with the
hurricane and the butterfly. If you tried to forecast if a hurricane
in America will form a week from now, and you knew exactly the laws of
motion that describe the creation of the hurricane, and you knew the
initial conditions (the present conditions) in every point of the
atmosphere, you'd still be unable to forecast; because even a
butterfly moving its wings in China would alter conditions enough in
order to yield a different result. This does not mean that the
butterfly is the cause of the hurricane; rather, it means that the
creation of the hurricane is so sensitive to the infinitesimal
difference that could be present in its "causes" that causality
effectively disappears altogether and the hurricane is reduced to a
random phenomenon.

It is easier to understand it if instead of trying to predict a
hurricane we try to predict the outcome of a roulette. Suppose you
know everything you need in order to calculate the outcome of the
roulette: the initial velocity of the ball, the initial angle speed of
the wheel, the weight, elasticity, and other properties of the ball,
the properties of the roulette, the properties of the wheel, the
temperature of the ball, roulette, and wheel, the air temperature and
pressure, humidity, and so on. Would you be able to predict the
outcome? The answer is no, because this, too, is chaotic, provided you
spin the roulette reasonably fast and provided you give the ball a
reasonable initial speed. A mere random collision of a molecule of air
would make a difference large enough in order to change the outcome.
This does not mean that the collision is the reason for the outcome;
the outcome depends on everything and nothing at the same time, so
that it is effectively random.

The roulette is an artificially created system with only 37 possible
outcomes, each one with an equal probability. Natural systems are much
more complicated than that. The atmosphere is incredibly more
complicated, and while weather models can predict the weather for
three, sometimes maybe four or five, days ahead, they can't do better,
and no matter how much you improve the models or the knowledge of the
initial conditions, you'll never be able to forecast more than two
weeks ahead, simply because you don't know what all butterflies of the
world are doing or will do, let alone all molecules of air in the
atmosphere; and even if you knew, it would still not be enough,
because if you knew the molecules' speed with an accuracy of 20
decimal digits, such as 25.15235789634239283553, the 21st digit would
make the difference; not just a difference between sparse clouds and
many clouds, but a difference between sunshine and heavy snow.

There are, however, important things that you know about the roulette.
Although its results are purely random, you know that the average
value is 18, and that the value ranges in a uniform manner from 0 to
36. You can think of roulette outcomes as random variations around a
mean of 18, as Figure 1 shows. But the roulette is an extremely simple
artificial system. Natural systems are much more complicated than
that.

.. figure:: images/roulette-climate.png

   Figure 1: How the climate would behave if it were like a roulette

People have been tempted to think of climate in much the same way as a
roulette, and that is, unfortunately, the dominating view in climate
science. It is alleged that climate is something like the average
value of the roulette, with the weather being something like the
specific roulette outcome. In other words, it is alleged that the
average temperature of the Earth is, say, 15°C, but the temperature in
Athens in 13 April 2009 can be 22°C, in much the same way that the
average roulette outcome is 18 but a specific roulette outcome can be
31. If you average many successive roulette outcomes, the result will
be 18; and it is claimed that, similarly, if you average the
temperature of all locations of the Earth for many successive years,
the result will be 15°C. The roulette outcome varies, but the
underlying average remains the same.  If the average of the roulette
changes, this will be traced to a specific reason, such as a
modification of the wheel; and it is assumed that a change in the
"underlying climate" can also be attributed to a specific reason. Is
this correct? Here is where Hurst and Kolmogorov come in.

References
----------

.. [#cooper] N. G. Cooper, *From Cardinals to Chaos: Reflections on
   the life and legacy of Stanislaw Ulam,* Cambridge Univ. Press,
   1989.
