restindex
    page-title: The extreme weather
/restindex

The extreme weather
===================

**[Needs revision and expansion.]**

.. epigraph::

   *"Just as dawn began to glow, there arose from the horizon a black
   cloud.... All day long the South Wind blew..., blowing fast,
   submerging the mountain in water, overwhelming the people like an
   attack. No-one could see his fellow, they could not recognize each
   other in the torrent.... Six days and seven nights came the wind
   and flood, the storm flattening the land. When the seventh day
   arrived, the storm was pounding, the flood was a war, struggling
   with itself like a woman writhing in labour. The sea calmed, fell
   still, the whirlwind and flood stopped up. I looked around all day
   long; quiet had set in, and all the human beings had turned to
   clay. The terrain was as flat as a roof. I opened a vent and fresh
   air, daylight, fell upon the side of my nose. I fell to my knees
   and sat weeping, tears streaming down the side of my nose."*

   ―Gilgamesh XI:96–137 [#gilgamesh]_

.. epigraph::

   *"[Hail] fell and lightning flashed back and forth. It was the
   worst storm in all the land of Egypt since it had become a nation.
   Throughout Egypt hail struck everything in the fields―both men and
   animals; it beat down everything growing in the fields and stripped
   every tree."*

   ―Exodus 9:24 (NIV)

Extreme weather phenomena, however you define them, have been
happening throughout mankind's memory.  Has the frequency of extreme
weather phenomena increased?

In order to answer this question, we need to define what we mean by
extreme weather phenomena. If last year there was a deadly hurricane
in the U.S., and this year there has been a huge flood in Poland, and
next year there is a huge flood in Spain, and the year after that
there is a typhoon in China, you can't just say anything at all about
the frequency of such phenomena, until you take *all* similar
phenomena of a large enough period in the past and count them. If you
define hurricanes and typhoons as extreme phenomena, you need to look
at *all* hurricanes and typhoons of, say, the last 100 years, and not
just the ones you remember, and see if their frequency is increasing.
Here are some charts:

[Four charts: u.s. hurricanes, china typhoons, spanish and polish
floods.]

These charts are not proof that extreme weather phenomena are not
increasing; we might have been cherry-picking. The point that we are
trying to make is that a deadly hurricane, or any kind of extreme
weather event, does not constitute evidence of climate change; and
that it is very difficult to define, or measure, the "frequency of
extreme weather phenomena".

There is, however, an undeniable increase in the frequency with which
media trasmit pictures of extreme phenomena from around the world. We
observe floods and destructions that we would otherwise not know, and
this creates a false perception that the extreme phenomena have become
more frequent.

Furthermore, there is a change in the way we perceive nature. Being
used to always having water in the tap of our house and air
conditioners that adjust the temperature throughout the year, we have
forgotten that Nature does not feature any such kind of monotonous
constantness. We have become passive observers and we magnify every
small unsettling natural phenomenon.

Next: `The changing climate`_

.. _the changing climate: ownobservations.html

References
----------

.. [#gilgamesh] Available at
   http://www.ancienttexts.org/library/mesopotamian/gilgamesh/tab11.htm,
   accessed 2009-04-19.
