restindex
/restindex

The melting ice
===============

The ice in the Arctic is never the same. It freezes and thaws all the
time. It builds up during winter, and it melts again during summer. In
September most Arctic ice has melted, and it starts to build up again;
in March, there is the largest amount of ice, and then it starts
melting again. The difference between March and September is huge: in
September there are 5-8 million square kilometres of ice, whereas in
March there are about 15. This means that more than half of the ice,
up to 10 million square kilometres, is melting every summer, and then
rebuilding each winter.  This, of course, is absolutely normal, in the
same way that some lakes freeze and thaw each year. Whenever you are
shown pictures of melting ice, you are probably not told that this is
the routine melting of ice each summer, and not anything special.

Figure 1 shows what is the minimum ice extent each year; that is, what
is the ice extent in September.


.. figure:: images/minimum-north-ice-including-2008.png

   Figure 1: Arctic ice extent (millions of sq. km) in September

.. admonition:: How do we know?

   How do we know the ice extent in the sea? We know it because the
   sea at the poles is being photographed by satellites on a daily
   basis, since 1979.  Extracting the ice extent as a number of
   square kilometres from the photographs requires image processing,
   and different scientists arrive at different results. This is one
   reason why our chart might not be exactly the same as those you've
   seen elsewhere. Another reason is that some people might include
   only the Arctic ocean into their calculations, whereas others
   include some bays around Greenland or so. The big picture,
   however, remains the same; the ice is being photographed, and
   there is little room for interpreting the photographs. This means
   that the chart above is close to being a fact, rather than being
   theory.

   Ice extent before 1979, however, is mostly theory, because it
   mostly comes from historical records given by ships, and it
   requires lots of assumptions to arrive at generalized results from
   records that are sparse in both time and location. Although this
   point does not affect our discussion about the melting ice, we
   make it because, later on, the distinction between fact and theory
   will be of tremendous importance.

Whenever you see publications showing a worrying decreasing trend in
the Arctic ice, it is always the September ice. Many publications do
mention that it is the "minimum annual ice extent" they are talking
about. Some do not, but you can check that it is the same thing by
comparing with other publications. In any case, you can check the data
for yourself [#ice-extent-record]_.

Although the September ice extent does show an interesting falling
trend, there is nothing that makes it representative of the planet's
temperature any more than the March ice extent; or the annual average
extent.  What's more, the Earth has two poles, and there is nothing in
the North Pole that makes it more representative than the South Pole.
Figure 2 shows six charts together; the top left we've already seen,
and the other five are new.  (We include data only up to 2007 in these
charts, because 2008 has not been added to the data compilations that
include the entire record from 1979; however, recent data are
available elsewhere and are updated on a daily
basis [#ice-monitoring]_.)

.. figure:: images/six-ice-extent-charts.png

   Figure 2: Ice extent (millions of sq. km): Arctic on the left,
   Antarctic on the right; minimum extent at the top (September for
   the Arctic, March for the Antarctic), maximum extent in the middle
   (March for the Arctic, September for the Antarctic), annual average
   at the bottom.

If we assume that there is something in ice extent that is
representative of the planet's temperature, wouldn't that be the total
ice extent, north and south added? Figure 3 shows that.

.. figure:: images/total-ice-extent.png

   Figure 3: Total ice extent (millions of sq. km), annual average,
   for both Arctic and Antarctic

As we can see in these charts, the total ice has, indeed, been
constantly shrinking during the last 30 years, by 10%.  What we want
to point out right now is that this shrinking of total ice is in no
way so marked as is the September Arctic ice, which is what is being
featured in publications as the alleged evidence of how devastatingly
fast anthropogenic (human-induced) global warming progresses. But if
this reasoning were correct, then we could equally say that the planet
is cooling, since the Antarctic ice extent has been slightly
increasing.  For every hypothesis you can make about why the Arctic is
more representative, we can make a hypothesis about why the Antarctic
is more representative, and the one who has more imagination will win.
In other words, whereas the evolution of ice extent during the last 30
years is a fact, the idea that the Arctic is more representative than
the Antarctic is theory, if not speculation.

Another argument goes that the Arctic ice has not only shrunk in
extent, but it has thinned, from an average of 3 metres to an average
of 2 metres during the last 50 years. But whereas the ice extent is
fact, because it is directly derived from satellite images, the
so-called "average" ice thickness is theory. We have some measurements
of ice thickness because occasionally submarines break the ice and
emerge to the surface of the broken ice, and the captain records the
thickness of the ice in the log; but if you have one measurement by a
submarine in November 1960, and you have another measurement by
another submarine, at a point 1000 km away, in September 1961, and so
on, it takes a large number of questionable assumptions to correlate
these sparse measurements.  Attempts are also being made to derive the
ice thickness from satellite images, but this is also theory. When
processing images in order to determine the ice extent, you know that
something close to white is ice, and something close to blue is water;
but it's not that simple to determine ice thickness, and it is
debatable whether this is at all possible by processing a satellite
image [#ice-thickness]_.

Another important point about the Arctic ice is that the last 30 years
for which we have measurements is only a tiny period of time. In the
summer of 2007 there was indeed the lowest ice extent during those 30
years, and the only year in which the Northwest Passage was clear of
ice. The only year in those 30 years; not the only year in shipping
history, as some media publications suggest. The passage is also known
to have been clear at least in 1905, 1942, and
1944 [#northwest-passage]_. In other words, when the media discusses
the "all time" historical low of 2007, they demonstrate a very narrow
understanding of "all time".

What we wanted to show in this chapter is that there is nothing nearly
as alarming as advertised about the melting sea ice. But we admit
that the total earth ice has, indeed, been shrinking very slowly
during the last 30 years.  Does this constitute evidence of
anthropogenic global warming? We will deal with this question, and
with the interesting (but not unprecedented) changes in the Arctic, in
a later chapter.

Next: `The extreme weather`_

.. _the extreme weather: extreme.html

References
----------

.. [#ice-extent-record] Daily ice extent at the Arctic and Antarctic;
   http://sidads.colorado.edu/DATASETS/seaice/polar-stereo/trends-climatologies/ice-extent/nasateam/gsfc.nasateam.daily.extent.1978-2007.s,
   accessed on 2009-03-15.

.. [#ice-monitoring] Ice extent data for the Arctic Ocean are
   published by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Earth
   Observation Research Center (JAXA/EORC);
   http://www.ijis.iarc.uaf.edu/en/home/seaice_extent.htm, accessed on
   2009-04-02.

.. [#ice-thickness] John L. Daly, "The top of the world: is the North
   Pole turning to water?"; http://www.john-daly.com/polar/arctic.htm,
   accessed on 2009-04-06.

.. [#northwest-passage] Noel Sheppard, "Reports of Record Arctic Ice
   Melt Disgracefully Ignore History", 9 September 2007;
   http://newsbusters.org/blogs/noel-sheppard/2007/09/09/reports-record-arctic-ice-melt-disgracefully-ignore-history,
   accessed on 2009-04-06.
