restindex
/restindex

The climate models
==================

.. epigraph::

   *"There is considerable confidence that Atmosphere-Ocean
   General Circulation Models (AOGCMs) provide credible quantitative
   estimates of future climate change, particularly at continental and
   larger scales."*

   ―IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, The Physical Science Basis, p. 591
   [#ipcc-models]_

.. epigraph::

   *"The IPCC report ... is very clear in stating that the detection
   and attribution of climate changes is only clearly possible at
   continental scales and above."*

   ―Gavin Schmidt, prominent climatologist [#gavin-on-credibility]_

.. epigraph::

   *"The increase in rainfall in East Africa, extending into the Horn
   of Africa, is also robust across the ensemble of models, with 18
   of 21 models projecting an increase in the core of this region,
   east of the Great Lakes."*
    
   ―IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, The Physical Science Basis, p. 869
   [#ipcc-regional]_

The melting ice, the extreme weather events, and the rising
temperature of the Earth the last few decades, are pointed to,
sometimes by media and environmentalists, and sometimes by scientists,
as the devastating *result* of man-made global warming,
but they are usually not used in scientific circles as
*evidence* of such warming. Scientists who support the man-made global
warming hypothesis will usually
admit that, while the climate is changing, this is no news; this has
happened before. But this time, they claim, it's different, and the
reason they know it's different is that this is what the models say.
All humanity's fears about the future of the climate are because of
what the models say.  Let's take a look at these models.

.. admonition:: What is a model?

   A computer model is a program that simulates a real process. For
   example, car manufacturers perform computer simulations of crashes.
   The car structure is divided in little elements, and the computer
   calculates how each each one of these elements will behave, based
   on the forces that act on it from its neighbouring elements; and
   this calculation is repeated for many successive time instants. 

   The reason such a simulation system is called a model is that it is
   a representation of reality, in the same way that a model aircraft
   is a representation of a real aircraft.  Similarly, a map models
   the landscape, i.e. represents it.

   Computer models accept input and produce output. The input to a
   crash model could be the speed of the car, the point of impact,
   etc; the output could be the forces that are applied to the bodies
   of the passengers. Making the required calculations is frequently
   called "running the model".

   You must always bear in mind that a model is a model and reality is
   reality. Good models approximate reality well, but they are still
   models; they are not reality.

Climate models, also known as General Circulation Models or GCMs, are
very complicated models that accept a number of inputs such as carbon
dioxide, sun radiation, and many more (the input variables of climate
models are often called forcings). The models are run in huge
supercomputers, simulating the evolution of climate around the globe,
and they produce the temperature and rainfall
around the earth as a function of the input. The argument goes that
when the models are run without the input that is allegedly caused by
humans (i.e. when they are run with the "normal" or "pre-industrial"
concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere), then there is no
global warming; but when they are run with the alleged "anthropogenic
forcings", i.e. with increased carbon dioxide concentrations, then
there is global warming at the end of the 20th century, which
continues throughout the 21st. This, goes on the argument, proves that
the recent warming of the Earth, unlike previous climate changes, is
caused by human activity; and the models, goes on the argument, can
tell us how the climate will be several decades from now.

I can claim that if you drive your car at 30 km/h and you hit a wall
flat on, you will only get a bruise on your left shoulder; and if you
ask me why I think that, I can tell you that this is what the computer
crash model says.  This can be a convincing answer only if we have
reasons to believe that the model works well. Therefore, the crucial
question is: "How reliable are the climate models?" The
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change (IPCC) attempts to answer
that question in pages 600–601 of "The Physical Science Basis"
[#ipcc-models]_, which is part of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report.
They mention three reasons: (1) that the models are based on
established physical laws; (2) that the models can reproduce features
of the current climate; (3) that the models can reproduce features of
past climate. We need to examine them one by one.

**(1) The models are based on established physical laws.** If we know
the speed and direction of a die, its dimensions, and the hardness of
the materials of which the die and the surface on which it falls are
constructed, can we predict the outcome? The physical laws of movement
are very well known and understood in that case, but any model would
fail miserably. The reason is that the problem is extremely
complicated.  If a model that attempts to simulate the physical movement of a
die fails to predict the outcome, when the physical laws are fully known
and really well understood, the fact that climate models are based on
physical laws constitutes absolutely no evidence whatsoever that the
models can work well. Climate is incredibly more complex than the
throwing of a die. What's more, by the IPCC's own words, in climate
there are "limitations in scientific understanding" ([#ipcc-models]_,
p. 601).

**(2) The models can reproduce features of current climate.** It's not
difficult to make a die throwing model that can reproduce features of
die throwing. A model could be made that reproduces the fact that a
die accelerates downwards; that when it hits the surface it rebounds;
that it maintains its angular momentum; that it loses energy through
friction; and so on. If a model can reproduce these features, this
does not create any confidence whatsoever that it is able to correctly
reproduce the final outcome of a real throw.  Similarly, the fact that
climate models can reproduce winters and summers, or dry areas and humid
areas, has nothing to do with their ability to tell us how the climate
will be in the future.

**(3) The models can reproduce features of past climate.** This
argument is summarized in Figure 1. Climate models, it is claimed,
are successful in reproducing the climate of the 20th century well,
and therefore it is expected that they will be able to also reproduce
the 21st century. In the Figure, the black line represents the (estimated) reality;
and the yellow lines are 58 different outputs from several different
climate models. The red line is the average of these outputs. Your
first impression would be "wow, the models are good!" But let's take a
more careful look at the Figure.

.. figure:: images/ipcc-model-reproduction-of-20th-century.png

   Figure 1: IPCC's presentation of model reliability
   ([#ipcc-models]_, p. 600).

The vertical axis in Figure 1 represents the departure from the mean
temperature. If, for example, the temperature of the planet is 15°C on
the average, and in 1962 the temperature of the planet was 15.3°C,
then the black line will be at +0.3 in 1962. The problem is that the
comparison is between the real departure and the departure of each
model. If a model says that the temperature is 10°C, and in reality
the temperature is 15°C, this is not visible in Figure 1. This means
that the 60 lines of Figure 1 are artificially made in order to
approximately fall on each other; if plotted without subtracting the
mean, they would be 60 distinct lines, often very far from each other;
if the chart were still only 2°C high, as it is now, many lines would
be entirely outside the chart.

You may argue that if a model could get the departure from the mean,
this would be a remarkable achievement, even if it could not get the
actual value. Indeed. But it's different if you are shown Figure 1 and
you think "wow, the models are good!", and it's different if you were
shown a Figure of 60 entirely distinct lines, far from each other, in
which case you'd think "hmm, the models are crap; however, they do
seem to get the slope right."

Do they get the slope right? From what we can see, the (estimated) reality indicates
relatively constant temperature from 1930 to 1970; in contrast, the
models indicate a continuous temperature rise from 1930 to 1970, with
an abrupt drop in 1962, when the Agung volcano errupted. We don't see,
in that Figure, that the erruption has particularly influenced
reality. If you look carefully into Figure 1, you'll notice other
problems as well.

A third problem is that it is completely unscientific to draw the red
line that shows the average of the models. There are absolutely no
scientific grounds to believe that the average of the models is
something special, or that it is better from the models. If the models
get it wrong, there is absolutely no reason why the average of many
models would get it less wrong. In fact, the mere existence of that
red line makes us wonder: how were the 58 model outputs chosen? Why
were those 58 outputs chosen, and not some other 58 outputs? Could
that be cherry-picking?

Finally, even if the models match reality to some extent, how do we
know that they were not made to fit reality? Normally scientists are
extremely careful to adjust their models to match a specific set of
data, and then they check how well their models match an entirely
different set of data. In this case, for example, one could adjust the
models so that they'd match the period 1900―1950, without looking at
1950―2000, and then checking how well the models can match reality for
the latter period. This is not as easy as it seems in the case of
climate models, and it may be impossible because of the huge
complexity of the problem and the fact that there is data for only
about one century; but we've never been given evidence that the match,
to the doubtful extent that it exists, is anything better than
data fitting.

When someone claims that the models are good, the burden is on them to
prove it. If I claim that you are an elephant, the burden is on me to
provide the evidence; you do not need to prove that you are not an
elephant. Instead of clear evidence, we are provided with confusing
arguments and strange linguistic formations: rather than being told
that "there is evidence that the models can predict future climate",
we are being told that "there is considerable confidence that [the
models] provide credible quantitative estimates of future climate,
particularly at continental scales and above." What is "considerable
confidence" and how far is it from certainty? Who is it that is
considerably confident? What is "credible"? Does it merely mean
plausible? What does "particularly at continental scales and above"
mean? Does it mean "only at continental scales and above", as the
quotation by Gavin Schmidt implies? Or does it mean "which is good at
regional scales and even better at larger ones", as is implied by
the IPCC's 94-page-long Chapter 11 [#ipcc-regional]_, that is crammed
with regional details?

A number of studies explain why the models are not credible (e.g.
[#frank]_, [#credibility-revisited]_). But we have chosen, in this
chapter, to only look at what IPCC says. The IPCC should have provided
evidence that models do a decent job, and then we'd be able to start
discussing on the merit of that evidence. But the IPCC, as you can
see, has not provided any evidence. Rather than clear answers to clear
questions, they have provided confusion and lawyerish language.

Next: `The scientific consensus`_

.. _the scientific consensus: consensus.html

References
----------

.. [#ipcc-models] David A. Randall, Richard A. Wood, Sandrine Bony,
   Robert Colman, Thierry Fichefet, John Fyfe, Vladimir Kattsov, et
   al., "Climate models and their evaluation", in IPCC Fourth
   Assessment Report: Working Group I Report: "The Physical Science
   Basis", 2007; http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/ar4-wg1.htm, accessed
   on 2009-04-22.

.. [#gavin-on-credibility] G. Schmidt, “Hypothesis testing and long
   range memory,” RealClimate, 10 August 2008;
   http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2008/08/hypothesis-testing-and-long-term-memory/,
   accessed on 2009-04-24.

.. [#ipcc-regional] Jens Hesselbjerg Christensen, Bruce Hewitson,
   Aristita Busuioc, Anthony Chen, Xuejie Gao, Isaac Held, Richard
   Jones, et al., "Regional Climate Projections", in IPCC Fourth
   Assessment Report: Working Group I Report: "The Physical Science
   Basis", 2007; http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/ar4-wg1.htm, accessed
   on 2009-04-24.

.. [#frank] Patrick Frank, "A climate of belief", *Skeptic* 14(1), pp.
   22―30, 2008.

.. [#credibility-revisited] G. G. Anagnostopoulos, D. Koutsoyiannis,
   A. Christofides, A. Efstratiadis, and N. Mamassis, "Credibility of
   climate predictions," *Hydrological Sciences Journal,*  to be
   published on 2009.

